README.md, before:

# JFF Computer with TMSHAT

This is an enhanced version of the [JFF Computer](https://github.com/konkotgit/JFF) by @Skoti, which enables the use of the TMS9928A or TMS9929A Video Display Processors (VDPs), in addition to the TMS9918A VDP.

## Current Status

The modified JFF mainboard 1.1b Build1 has been successfully designed, built and tested (as of Aug 20th, 2025). See *warning* on the next paragraph.

The TMSRGBCustom TMSHAT Build1 has been successfully designed, built and tested (as of Sep 11th, 2025). It has been successfully tested for RGB output on the modified JFF mainboard 1.1b Build1 with a TMS9929A NL installed (50Hz).

The manufacturing of the *Build1* PCB prototypes have been kindly sponsored by [PCBWay](https://www.pcbway.com).

The TMSRGBv2 TMSHAT is still untested, but it is expected to work.

> [!WARNING]
>
> While building the JFF mainboard it has been detected that the original JFF mainboard revision 1.1b has a bug in the general purpose IO ports schematic similar (but different) to [the bug that affected the Omega Home Computer prior to version 1.5](https://github.com/skiselev/omega/issues/56) which the modified JFF mainboard revision 1.1b-TMSHAT Build1 has *inherited*. The bug does not affect joysticks, only IO devices which require output to the trigger pins are affected.
>
> A fix will be committed to solve that problem on a future build of the modified JFF mainboard, once the fix has been validated using a MSX mouse.
>
> For existing original JFF revision 1.1b mainboards (and for the modified JFF mainboard revision 1.1b-TMSHAT Build1), a socket adaptor for U20 called the *JFF-joyfix-board* has been developed to fix the problem, and will be published too once validated.
>

## Motivation

The JFF Computer by @Skoti is a [MSX1 compatible computer](https://www.msx.org/wiki/MSX1) which uses the TMS9918A VDP which is part of the [TMS9918 family](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TMS9918) of Video Display Processors from Texas Instruments.
The TMS9918A outputs a 60Hz composite NTSC video signal, and thus the JFF has a single RCA video output connector with a composite video signal.

The TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs, from the same family of Video Display Processors, output instead analog luminance (Y) and color difference (R-Y and B-Y) signals.
Except for the video output signals, the TMS9918A, TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs behave identically and have an almost identical pinout.

The difference in the pinout of the TMS9918A, TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs affects the following pins:

| **Pin Number** | **TMS9918A Name** | **TMS9918A Description**        | **TMS9928A/TMS9929A Name** | **TMS9928A/TMS9929A Description** |
| -------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------- | -------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| 35             | EXTVDP            | External VDP input              | B-Y                        | B-Y color difference output       |
| 36             | COMVID            | Composite video output          | Y                          | luminance/sync output             |
| 38             | CPUCLK            | VDP color burst frequency clock | R-Y                        | R-Y color difference output       |

Given that the JFF Computer does not use VDP pins 35 nor 38, and just uses pin 36 for composite video output, it should be relatively straightforward to allow the use of the TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDPs alternatively to the TMS9918A VDP.
Using the luminance and color difference signals provided by the TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDPs, an enhanced output video signal like RGB or component video can be generated for a better user experience.

## Proposed Changes

### Original JFF Computer mainboard (rev 1.1b)

[<img src="images/jff_mainboard-original-full-view-annotated.png" width="768"/>](images/jff_mainboard-original-full-view-annotated.png)

### Modified JFF Computer mainboard (rev 1.1b-TMSHAT)

[<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png" width="768"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png)

The JFF computer mainboard is modified as described here.

* A new audio/video header J13 is added to the JFF computer mainboard, which can be used to select between the TMS9918A or TMS9928A/TMS9929A VDPs, and to provide the required audio and video signals to an external companion card called TMSHAT which converts them into a specific audio/video output.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-new-header-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-new-header-annotated.png)

  The header consists of at least the following signals:
  * GND
  * +5V
  * CPUCLK/R-Y
  * EXTVDP/B-Y
  * COMVID/Y
  * COMVID_OUT
  * AUDIO

  A total of 8 pins are used for the audio/video header, giving 1 extra pin for future use.

  Allowed VDP configurations:

  - *TMS9918A*

    To use a TMS9918A VDP, pins 5 (COMVID/Y) and 6 (COMVID_OUT) of J13, which use inverted colors in the silkscreen text, must be bridged and a TMS9918A must be installed in U6.
    In this configuration the modified JFF computer works identically as the original JFF computer with a TMS9918A and outputs a composite video signal on the motherboard video RCA connector.

  - *TMS9928A/TMS9929A*

    To use a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP, a companion TMSHAT card needs to be connected to J13 and a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP must be installed in U6.
    In this configuration the modified JFF computer will provide an audio and video output according to the capabilities of the TMSHAT card connected.
    
* A small clearance area is defined between the power barrel connector and the DIN8 cassette connector in the JFF computer mainboard.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-clearance-area-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-clearance-area-annotated.png)

  This allows to, as long as they fit, seamlessly place in that area the additional audio/video connectors provided by the TMSHAT cards.
  Note that the additional audio/video connectors are never part of the JFF computer mainboard, they are instead soldered to the TMSHAT cards. But, for convenience, the mentioned area allows making such connectors available on the back of the JFF computer as if they were on the mainboard.

  The power led is relocated next to the Audio connector in the JFF computer motherboard to allow the described clearance.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-original-led-location.png" width="256"/>](images/jff_mainboard-original-led-location.png)
  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-led-location.png" width="256"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-led-location.png)

* Enough clearance is preserved too for the DD1718PA +12V/-12V voltage module converter to be installed upside-down in the J5 header.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-DD1718PA-clearance-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-DD1718PA-clearance-annotated.png)

* A new extra 3mm hole is added to the JFF computer mainboard.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-attachment-holes-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-attachment-holes-annotated.png)

  A TMSHAT card must be properly attached to the JFF computer mainboard, specially as it has to deal with cable insertion/removal forces when audio/video connectors are present on the TMSHAT card itself.

  The top-left 3mm hole and the new 3mm hole on the JFF computer mainboard are the mechanical attachment points for the TMSHAT cards, while the audio/video header attachment provides the electrical signals.

* External companion TMSHAT cards are designed to be connected to the new audio/video header J13, attached to the previously described mainboard holes and shaped to avoid any collision with existing components in the JFF computer. The TMSHAT cards provide a specific audio/video output using one or more embedded connectors in the card itself.

  As an example, a pair of TMSHAT card implementations are provided to convert the luminance and color difference signals of the TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs to RGB, and output both the audio and RGB video signals through a DIN8 connector compatible with [audio/video cables for Panasonic MSX2+ machines](https://www.msx.org/wiki/RGB_(8-pin_DIN_45326)#Mitsubishi_.28Japan.29.2C_National.2FPanasonic_.28except_the_FS-A1WSX.29.2C_Sakhr.2C_Sony_and_Yamaha_computers_.2B_Sanyo_MSX2.2F2.2B_computers).

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-with-TMSHAT-example.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-with-TMSHAT-example.png)

## [Hardware](hardware/kicad/)

This project provides source files for the following hardware designs:

* JFF mainboard rev 1.1b-TMSHAT aka [JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard](#jff-tmshat-mainboard)

* TMSHAT for RGB output using a standard TMS-RGBv2 module, aka [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2](#jff-tmshat-hat-tmsrgbv2)

* TMSHAT for RGB output using a custom TMS-RGB implementation, aka [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom](#jff-tmshat-hat-tmsrgbcustom)

### JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard

This mainboard design allows using a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP in combination with a TMSHAT, or a TMS9918A VDP by just closing a jumper.

#### [JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard Build1](hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-Build1/)

[<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png)

[Bill Of Materials (BoM)](https://html-preview.github.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/herraa1/JFF-TMSHAT/main/hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-Build1/jff_mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT/bom/ibom.html)

[Schematic and PCB](https://kicanvas.org/?github=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fherraa1%2FJFF-TMSHAT%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fhardware%2Fkicad%2FJFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-Build1%2Fjff_mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8311-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8311.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8312-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8312.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Top-IMG_8303-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Top-IMG_8303.png)

##### Configurations

###### TMS9918

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9918ANL-Configuration-Landscape-IMG_8321-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9918ANL-Configuration-Landscape-IMG_8321.png)

###### TMS9929

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-Without-HAT-Landscape-IMG_8319-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-Without-HAT-Landscape-IMG_8319.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Landscape-IMG_8306-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Landscape-IMG_8306.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Rear-IMG_8308-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Rear-IMG_8308.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Left-IMG_8307-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Left-IMG_8307.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Front-IMG_8310-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Front-IMG_8310.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Right-IMG_8309-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Right-IMG_8309.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Test-50Hz-IMG_8329-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Test-50Hz-IMG_8329.png)


### JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2

This TMSHAT provides RGB output via a DIN8 connector compatible with audio/video cables for Panasonic MSX2+ machines when using a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP.

It requires a [TMS-RGB v2 module](https://tms-rgb.com/) by [Nicholas Piegdon](https://twitter.com/npiegdon).

#### [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2 Build1](hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1/)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-front.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-front.jpg)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-back.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-back.jpg)

[Bill Of Materials (BoM)](https://html-preview.github.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/herraa1/JFF-TMSHAT/main/hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1/bom/ibom.html)

[Schematic and PCB](https://kicanvas.org/?github=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fherraa1%2FJFF-TMSHAT%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fhardware%2Fkicad%2FJFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314.png)

### JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom

This TMSHAT provides RGB output via a DIN8 connector compatible with audio/video cables for Panasonic MSX2+ machines when using a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP.

It implements a custom TMS-RGB directly in the TMSHAT.

#### [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1](hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1/)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-front.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-front.jpg)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-back.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-back.jpg)

[Bill Of Materials (BoM)](https://html-preview.github.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/herraa1/JFF-TMSHAT/main/hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1/bom/ibom.html)

[Schematic and PCB](https://kicanvas.org/?github=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fherraa1%2FJFF-TMSHAT%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fhardware%2Fkicad%2FJFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Top-IMG_8315-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Top-IMG_8315.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-IMG_8316-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-IMG_8316.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8317-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8317.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8318-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8318.png)


## Design considerations

* The external connectors in the mainboard of the original JFF computer must not be relocated
* Modifications to the original JFF computer must be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the functional goals
* The modified JFF-TMSHAT computer must behave exactly as the original JFF computer when configured in TMS9918A mode
* A TMSHAT card must not collide with components of the JFF computer nor with the DD1718PA voltage converter module

## Random notes (for internal reference only)

* The female header of the TMSHAT card must use long enough pins to account for the height of the connector used in the TMSHAT
* A minimum of 20mm of separation is required between the mainboard PCB and the TMSHAT PCB in order to use an inverted DIN8 connector in the TMSHAT card

## References

Skoti's JFF Computer
* https://github.com/konkotgit/JFF


## Image Sources

* https://www.oshwa.org/open-source-hardware-logo/

Commit message:

readme: more revision names, enhance J13 signal table description
Signed-off-by: Albert Herranz <albert_herranz@yahoo.es>

README.md, after:

# JFF Computer with TMSHAT

This is an enhanced version of the [JFF Computer](https://github.com/konkotgit/JFF) by @Skoti, which enables the use of the TMS9928A or TMS9929A Video Display Processors (VDPs), in addition to the TMS9918A VDP.

## Current Status

The modified JFF mainboard 1.1b-TMSHAT Build1 has been successfully designed, built and tested (as of Aug 20th, 2025). See *warning* on the next paragraph.

The TMSRGBCustom TMSHAT Build1 has been successfully designed, built and tested (as of Sep 11th, 2025). It has been successfully tested for RGB output on the modified JFF mainboard 1.1b-TMSHAT Build1 with a TMS9929A NL installed (50Hz).

The manufacturing of the *Build1* PCB prototypes have been kindly sponsored by [PCBWay](https://www.pcbway.com).

The TMSRGBv2 TMSHAT Build1 is still untested, but it is expected to work.

> [!WARNING]
>
> While building the JFF mainboard it has been detected that the original JFF mainboard revision 1.1b has a bug in the general purpose IO ports schematic similar (but different) to [the bug that affected the Omega Home Computer prior to version 1.5](https://github.com/skiselev/omega/issues/56) which the modified JFF mainboard revision 1.1b-TMSHAT Build1 has *inherited*. The bug does not affect joysticks, only IO devices which require output to the trigger pins are affected.
>
> A fix will be committed to solve that problem on a future build of the modified JFF mainboard, once the fix has been validated using a MSX mouse.
>
> For existing original JFF revision 1.1b mainboards (and for the modified JFF mainboard revision 1.1b-TMSHAT Build1), a socket adaptor for U20 called the *JFF-joyfix-board* has been developed to fix the problem, and will be published too once validated.
>

## Motivation

The JFF Computer by @Skoti is a [MSX1 compatible computer](https://www.msx.org/wiki/MSX1) which uses the TMS9918A VDP which is part of the [TMS9918 family](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TMS9918) of Video Display Processors from Texas Instruments.
The TMS9918A outputs a 60Hz composite NTSC video signal, and thus the JFF has a single RCA video output connector with a composite video signal.

The TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs, from the same family of Video Display Processors, output instead analog luminance (Y) and color difference (R-Y and B-Y) signals.
Except for the video output signals, the TMS9918A, TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs behave identically and have an almost identical pinout.

The difference in the pinout of the TMS9918A, TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs affects the following pins:

| **Pin Number** | **TMS9918A Name** | **TMS9918A Description**        | **TMS9928A/TMS9929A Name** | **TMS9928A/TMS9929A Description** |
| -------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------- | -------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| 35             | EXTVDP            | External VDP input              | B-Y                        | B-Y color difference output       |
| 36             | COMVID            | Composite video output          | Y                          | luminance/sync output             |
| 38             | CPUCLK            | VDP color burst frequency clock | R-Y                        | R-Y color difference output       |

Given that the JFF Computer does not use VDP pins 35 nor 38, and just uses pin 36 for composite video output, it should be relatively straightforward to allow the use of the TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDPs alternatively to the TMS9918A VDP.
Using the luminance and color difference signals provided by the TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDPs, an enhanced output video signal like RGB or component video can be generated for a better user experience.

## Proposed Changes

### Original JFF Computer mainboard (rev 1.1b)

[<img src="images/jff_mainboard-original-full-view-annotated.png" width="768"/>](images/jff_mainboard-original-full-view-annotated.png)

### Modified JFF Computer mainboard (rev 1.1b-TMSHAT)

[<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png" width="768"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png)

The JFF computer mainboard is modified as described here.

* A new audio/video header J13 is added to the JFF computer mainboard, which can be used to select between the TMS9918A or TMS9928A/TMS9929A VDPs, and to provide the required audio and video signals to an external companion card called TMSHAT which converts them into a specific audio/video output.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-new-header-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-new-header-annotated.png)

  The header provides access to the following signals:

  | **Pin Number** | **Name**   | **Type<br>(from JFF connector point of view)** | **Function**                                              |
  | -------------- | ---------- | ---------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
  | 1              | GND        | Power                                          | Common ground                                             |
  | 2              | +5V        | Power                                          | 5V power rail                                             |
  | 3              | CPUCLK/R-Y | OUT                                            | direct signal from pin 38 of VDP                          |
  | 4              | EXTVDP/B-Y | OUT                                            | direct signal from pin 35 of VDP                          |
  | 5              | COMVID/Y   | OUT                                            | direct signal from pin 36 of VDP                          |
  | 6              | COMVID_OUT | IN                                             | connected to JFF mainboard composite video output circuit |
  | 7              | NC         |                                                | (reserved)                                                |
  | 8              | AUDIO      | OUT                                            | final mixed audio signal                                  |

  A total of 8 pins are used for the audio/video header, giving 1 extra pin for future use.

  Allowed VDP configurations:

  - *TMS9918A*

    To use a TMS9918A VDP, pins 5 (COMVID/Y) and 6 (COMVID_OUT) of J13, which use inverted colors in the silkscreen text, must be bridged and a TMS9918A must be installed in U6.
    In this configuration the modified JFF computer works identically as the original JFF computer with a TMS9918A and outputs a composite video signal on the motherboard video RCA connector.

  - *TMS9928A/TMS9929A*

    To use a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP, a companion TMSHAT card needs to be connected to J13 and a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP must be installed in U6.
    In this configuration the modified JFF computer will provide an audio and video output according to the capabilities of the TMSHAT card connected.
    
* A small clearance area is defined between the power barrel connector and the DIN8 cassette connector in the JFF computer mainboard.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-clearance-area-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-clearance-area-annotated.png)

  This allows to, as long as they fit, seamlessly place in that area the additional audio/video connectors provided by the TMSHAT cards.
  Note that the additional audio/video connectors are never part of the JFF computer mainboard, they are instead soldered to the TMSHAT cards. But, for convenience, the mentioned area allows making such connectors available on the back of the JFF computer as if they were on the mainboard.

  The power led is relocated next to the Audio connector in the JFF computer motherboard to allow the described clearance.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-original-led-location.png" width="256"/>](images/jff_mainboard-original-led-location.png)
  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-led-location.png" width="256"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-led-location.png)

* Enough clearance is preserved too for the DD1718PA +12V/-12V voltage module converter to be installed upside-down in the J5 header.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-DD1718PA-clearance-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-DD1718PA-clearance-annotated.png)

* A new extra 3mm hole is added to the JFF computer mainboard.

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-attachment-holes-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-attachment-holes-annotated.png)

  A TMSHAT card must be properly attached to the JFF computer mainboard, specially as it has to deal with cable insertion/removal forces when audio/video connectors are present on the TMSHAT card itself.

  The top-left 3mm hole and the new 3mm hole on the JFF computer mainboard are the mechanical attachment points for the TMSHAT cards, while the audio/video header attachment provides the electrical signals.

* External companion TMSHAT cards are designed to be connected to the new audio/video header J13, attached to the previously described mainboard holes and shaped to avoid any collision with existing components in the JFF computer. The TMSHAT cards provide a specific audio/video output using one or more embedded connectors in the card itself.

  As an example, a pair of TMSHAT card implementations are provided to convert the luminance and color difference signals of the TMS9928A and TMS9929A VDPs to RGB, and output both the audio and RGB video signals through a DIN8 connector compatible with [audio/video cables for Panasonic MSX2+ machines](https://www.msx.org/wiki/RGB_(8-pin_DIN_45326)#Mitsubishi_.28Japan.29.2C_National.2FPanasonic_.28except_the_FS-A1WSX.29.2C_Sakhr.2C_Sony_and_Yamaha_computers_.2B_Sanyo_MSX2.2F2.2B_computers).

  [<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-with-TMSHAT-example.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-with-TMSHAT-example.png)

## [Hardware](hardware/kicad/)

This project provides source files for the following hardware designs:

* JFF mainboard rev 1.1b-TMSHAT aka [JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard](#jff-tmshat-mainboard)

* TMSHAT for RGB output using a standard TMS-RGBv2 module, aka [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2](#jff-tmshat-hat-tmsrgbv2)

* TMSHAT for RGB output using a custom TMS-RGB implementation, aka [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom](#jff-tmshat-hat-tmsrgbcustom)

### JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard

This mainboard design allows using a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP in combination with a TMSHAT, or a TMS9918A VDP by just closing a jumper.

#### [JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard Build1](hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-Build1/)

[<img src="images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png" width="512"/>](images/jff_mainboard-modified-full-view-annotated.png)

[Bill Of Materials (BoM)](https://html-preview.github.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/herraa1/JFF-TMSHAT/main/hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-Build1/jff_mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT/bom/ibom.html)

[Schematic and PCB](https://kicanvas.org/?github=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fherraa1%2FJFF-TMSHAT%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fhardware%2Fkicad%2FJFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-Build1%2Fjff_mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8311-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8311.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8312-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8312.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Top-IMG_8303-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Top-IMG_8303.png)

##### Configurations

###### TMS9918

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9918ANL-Configuration-Landscape-IMG_8321-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9918ANL-Configuration-Landscape-IMG_8321.png)

###### TMS9929

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-Without-HAT-Landscape-IMG_8319-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-Without-HAT-Landscape-IMG_8319.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Landscape-IMG_8306-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Landscape-IMG_8306.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Rear-IMG_8308-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Rear-IMG_8308.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Left-IMG_8307-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Left-IMG_8307.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Front-IMG_8310-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Front-IMG_8310.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Right-IMG_8309-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-with-JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-HATCloseUp-Right-IMG_8309.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Test-50Hz-IMG_8329-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Mainboard-1.1b-TMSHAT-Build1-and-TMS9929ANL-Configuration-With-TMSRGBCustom-Test-50Hz-IMG_8329.png)


### JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2

This TMSHAT provides RGB output via a DIN8 connector compatible with audio/video cables for Panasonic MSX2+ machines when using a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP.

It requires a [TMS-RGB v2 module](https://tms-rgb.com/) by [Nicholas Piegdon](https://twitter.com/npiegdon).

#### [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2 Build1](hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1/)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-front.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-front.jpg)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-back.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-back.jpg)

[Bill Of Materials (BoM)](https://html-preview.github.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/herraa1/JFF-TMSHAT/main/hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1/bom/ibom.html)

[Schematic and PCB](https://kicanvas.org/?github=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fherraa1%2FJFF-TMSHAT%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fhardware%2Fkicad%2FJFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBv2-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314.png)

### JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom

This TMSHAT provides RGB output via a DIN8 connector compatible with audio/video cables for Panasonic MSX2+ machines when using a TMS9928A or TMS9929A VDP.

It implements a custom TMS-RGB directly in the TMSHAT.

#### [JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1](hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1/)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-front.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-front.jpg)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-back.jpg" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-back.jpg)

[Bill Of Materials (BoM)](https://html-preview.github.io/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/herraa1/JFF-TMSHAT/main/hardware/kicad/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1/bom/ibom.html)

[Schematic and PCB](https://kicanvas.org/?github=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fherraa1%2FJFF-TMSHAT%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fhardware%2Fkicad%2FJFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Top-IMG_8313.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-PCB-Unpopulated-Bottom-IMG_8314.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Top-IMG_8315-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Top-IMG_8315.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-IMG_8316-512px.png" width="512"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-IMG_8316.png)

[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8317-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8317.png)
[<img src="images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8318-512px.png" width="256"/>](images/JFF-TMSHAT-Hat-TMSRGBCustom-Build1-Bottom-Detail-IMG_8318.png)


## Design considerations

* The external connectors in the mainboard of the original JFF computer must not be relocated
* Modifications to the original JFF computer must be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the functional goals
* The modified JFF-TMSHAT computer must behave exactly as the original JFF computer when configured in TMS9918A mode
* A TMSHAT card must not collide with components of the JFF computer nor with the DD1718PA voltage converter module

## Random notes (for internal reference only)

* The female header of the TMSHAT card must use long enough pins to account for the height of the connector used in the TMSHAT
* A minimum of 20mm of separation is required between the mainboard PCB and the TMSHAT PCB in order to use an inverted DIN8 connector in the TMSHAT card

## References

Skoti's JFF Computer
* https://github.com/konkotgit/JFF


## Image Sources

* https://www.oshwa.org/open-source-hardware-logo/
